https://verybadwizards.com/episode/episode-317-for-shame

Very Bad Wizards

·E317
Episode 317: For Shame
Episode Transcript
This transcript is automatically generated and available to Plus subscribers only

Very Bad Wizards is a podcast with a philosopher, my dad, and psychologist Dave Pizarro, having an informal discussion about issues in science and ethics.

Please note that the discussion contains bad words that I'm not allowed to say, and knowing my dad, some very inappropriate jokes.

Son, you keep dancing with the devil.

One day he's gonna follow you home.

The Green End boss has spoken!

Pay no attention to that man behind the curtain!

Who are you?

Who are you?

Who are you?

I'm a very bad man.

I'm a very good man.

Good man.

They think deep thoughts and with no more brains than you have.

Pay no attention to that man.

Anybody can have a brain.

You're a very bad man.

I'm a very good man.

Just a very bad wizard.

Welcome to Very Bad Wizards.

I'm Tamler Summers.

Dave, a lot of the most famous comedians in the world, including some VBW favorites like Bill Burr and Dave Chappelle, are getting slammed for agreeing to perform at the Riyadh Comedy Festival in Saudi Arabia because of their human rights abuses and purported role in 9-11.

I mean, we know it really happened there, but some people buy that story.

So anyway, here's my question.

If some Saudi Arabian official or prince offered us a big bag of money, I think they got a lot of money to do this, to do a live show at a Riyadh podcast festival, would we do it?

I'm going to do it.

People like Bill Burr and Dave Chappelle do it, so it can't be that bad.

I mean, aren't we complicit in this system by doing a podcast in the U.S.?

What are we guilty?

Blood is on our hands, Tamler.

Blood is on all of our hands.

So we might as well have crisp hundred dollar bills in those hands as well to go with all the blood some gold coins you know doubloons what's your answer well i mean i do think that has a lot of merit but i don't love the implications of it but like that's what even some people were saying, defending these comedians, they perform in the United States.

We're complicit in a genocide.

We've been responsible for some of the most horrific things over the last like 60 or 70 years that you can imagine.

And so like, but I don't know, I would like to, you know, reserve the right to take a stand against something.

Like, even if we're so complicit and we all deserve to die and burn in hell.

One man VVW show, Riyadh, coming soon.

David Pizarro, the good one.

The rich one.

I mean, that's the thing, you know, like this is something that can set a person up for life.

Part of the thing is that a lot of these people are doing fairly well already.

I mean, look, like I obviously have problems with human rights violations and all that.

So I'm not I don't mean to be flippant about it, but it just is the case where like there are Premier League soccer teams whose money you're like're like giving you know when you buy a shirt that are just owned by the saudis like there's yeah it's like actually hard to avoid it that's not an excuse for like actively taking the bag or whatever but it's not as easy to avoid as one might think and i do well some people did say no though no i mean i i don't mean it's not hard to avoid going to do a comedy show i mean it's hard to avoid not getting like somehow involved financially where you're supporting the saudis part of me thinks that like the evil we do is more familiar so it's like oh yeah those are like some scary arabs who don't let women drive like you're a monster if you support them but like there's a lot of shit that is monstrous that we're not taking a stand about here and and all over the world yeah that's again you got to draw the line personally somewhere and so i'm fine with saying no but like would you have done it in apartheid south africa would you do it in israel right now no because apartheid south africa is black people and I care about them a lot more than women and journalists yeah and journalists yeah no I don't I don't know I mean like Cornell has a Qatar deal where Cornell has a medical campus in Qatar now Qatar yeah whatever it's been accused of is not the same as Saudi Arabia they're more progressive but like you could certainly mount an argument that we should pull out of any of that stuff.

But I wouldn't blame anybody either way.

I gotta say, I do, for people like Bill Burr and Dave Chappelle, this is obviously being a little unfair, but it's like, you already have money.

Yeah, and it's a little undignified to just get paid a million dollars to do a show because these Saudi princes just have unlimited money.

Yeah, a lot of people do private shows, like entertainers, which just fly out and do private shows.

Beyonce has done like a bunch.

Yeah, totally.

Chappelle is a Muslim, so I could see why he's like extra or not, like he doesn't have a problem with that.

He supports what they're doing to women and journalists.

He's basically doing it himself.

At least they have it clear who's a woman and who's a man.

That's right.

Chappelle, you're not so confused now.

The people who can't drive, those are the women.

Actually, they can drive now.

I'm honestly conflicted about this.

And Saudi Arabia is a weird case because I feel like we're also so bound up with them that it's hard to disentangle.

I respect the people who say no.

Yeah, I do too.

I do also like I wouldn't blame somebody for saying yes, especially if it was like there are some MMA fighters who, you know, you don't make a good living fighting.

You're barely like making ends meet if you decide to be a pro fighter.

Another thing is they don't get taxed the same there.

So they have a lot of these promo fights out there or in Dubai or whatever.

And so they take it.

I feel a little more sympathy for people who's good.

That money is going to change their lives.

A lot of soccer players.

Cristiano Ronaldo, right?

Cristiano Ronaldo is out there fucking for a jillion dollars playing in the league.

Messi would never do that.

Stavi baby from former Come Town.

He didn't do it.

He said no.

He didn't do it.

Yeah.

Principle.

I do think there's also just a little something undignified about it because they're doing it for a purpose.

They're doing it to get you out there, to normalize it, to make it someplace that people feel like they want to travel to, I guess.

I don't know.

I haven't looked that deeply into it.

I just found out about it today.

But, you know, it also is different saying you shouldn't do it and being offered all that fucking money.

And then it's like so many things I could do with this money.

You know, we could stop evil AI probably.

You know, just give it all to effective altruist charities and stop evil AI.

So, you know, the un it all to effective altruist charities and, and stop evil AI.

So, you know, the unseemly part that you're pointing to is kind of interesting because I share in your intuition and there's something about like feeling like an extra whore where they're just like dumping all this money in your lap.

If it were humanitarian work, like I would have no problem, right?

If I, I wouldn't have a problem even going and teaching, but it's just doing like the, here's the big old bag of money.

It just makes you feel like dance, say something funny.

Exactly.

Yeah.

Yeah.

But isn't that what we do for our listeners?

A little bit.

For them.

For a lot less.

It's not unseemly because it's a lot.

But it could still be a little more before it became unseemly you know like i feel like we're a long ways to unseemly that's right uh so today we are going to talk about actually an essay or an article that is related in some sense to what we're discussing now which is shame um it is a Richard Schwader essay entitled Toward a Deep Cultural Psychology of Shame.

Yeah, it's interesting paper.

I'm looking at that's what we'll talk about in the main segment.

But first, I think this is this could be the start of a series.

In the series, I would at least propose calling it things that you and I Might Have Gotten Into a Big Fight Over in 2015.

So tell me why this is something you would have gotten in a fight.

Okay, so this is an article that somebody said we had to do an opening segment about it.

And then I put in the Slack, hey, should we do this?

And like basically claimed and thought it was my idea.

But somebody definitely sent it and you pointed that out to me.

So it's called Cueing in Pubs Disgraces Britain.

The Practice is Unpatriotic and Must Be Banned by Will Dunn in the New Statesman.

Just came out a week ago, six days ago, actually.

So we're right on it.

We've got to bring on the pulse of the British complainers.

Like when we talked about Cracker Barrel, like a week after Charlie Kirk was shot.

Yeah, exactly.

yeah so the reason I think this could get us into a fight is because I could see a me being way more on board with this uh and I'm still very on board with it um but more abrasively on board with it maybe uh in 2015 and I could see you really digging your heels into?

No, it should be orderly and everyone should get in line.

And it's unfair that some people won't be chosen by the bartender.

So yeah, the article itself is just a screed against not even a new practice, but a survey that a lot of British people, especially young ones and also the very old want there to be a line like a queue in pubs and he thinks that like destroys the culture of it and the the technique of getting the pub tender bartender what do they call them there bartender barman uh the barman's attention publican he see he calls it a publican a public publican?

And then a bar person.

But I think he's a turn of phrase.

He has a lot of fancy words as a writer for the New Statesman.

Yeah.

So can't you see this being, I mean, I'm joking obviously a little bit.

Oh yeah.

No, I'm sure we'll disagree about this.

Yeah.

So I don't think we have to explain this, but usually when you go to a bar or a pub, the one thing that really annoys me about this is that he assumes that we somehow on this side of the pond don't have the same exact practices.

You go to the bar, it's busy, you get to the bar and you're waiting and waiting and waiting and the bartender's serving like whatever, you know, all kinds of people before you.

And you're just sort of trying to like make this like weird eye contact but like not too much but you know you're trying to play it cool you're sort of leaned up against the bar and yeah time goes by and you're you're just uh thirsty you're thirsty and uh i've honestly never seen this the other option that he's saying people are choosing is literally lining up yeah in a single file line of some sort and waiting for the bartender, which I've only seen it like in a like an event where there's a cash bar.

Like at a stadium, if you're going to the bar at the stadium or something like that, they might have that.

But yeah, you're right.

It's very unusual.

It's actually kind of surprising that that practice is not more widespread.

So I don't think this Will Dunn is denying that, you know, it can be kind of frustrating sometimes if you don't get their attention.

But and here's why I think he's making this case just solely for British people is because he thinks there's best practices in.

Yeah.

Right.

Like he says, techniques differ.

But as with most things in British society, it's often best to approach sideways.

Once the bar is within reach, a hand is placed casually upon its edge.

This is performed as a relaxed lean, as if it was not the establishment of a key tactical position.

At the bar, there is a further performance of core British tenants.

You do not tell the publican you're next.

This is the kind of thing an American would do.

Eye contact with the bar person should be accidental, friendly without being overbearing, a smile or nod that shows you are ready for a beer at the time that's convenient for them.

Rudeness is punishable.

If you're a middle aged man, you stare intently at a barmaid.

You will not be served, nor should you.

Doesn't this appeal to some part of you, though?

Totally.

No, absolutely.

doesn't this appeal to some part of you though totally no absolutely uh and then when you're asked for your order you of course hand over the privilege to the person next to you yeah like a thirsty raleigh throwing his cape upon a puddle which maybe that is not an american thing no that's right but yeah but you do have to play that game where you know full well that the person next to you was after you but you sort of do Yeah, there is a charm to it.

I think it's more that I can't muster the outrage that it has for people who might think that standing in line is good.

And here's the thing.

The older we get, the longer it's going to take to get started.

No, I know.

And I think this explains the results.

There are different techniques for different ages, I think this explains the results.

There are different techniques for different ages.

Yeah.

You know, you have to like adjust your strategies.

I try to be very, you know, meek up there.

I'm humble.

Yes, me too.

And even if it takes forever to get the first one, I feel like the bartender, when you finally get that nod, like, you know, the bartender appreciates that you've not bitched.

Like you've sat there the whole time and you haven't bitched.

And he's like gonna pour you a double just because like you were a sport you know what i'm now thinking the neighborhood bar that i go to the most actually does have a kind of a line it's like these two lines it's because it's not one of these bars that go all the way around you know so there's not a ton of space like people aren't hanging out at the bar they're only ordering at the bar so but here's why I like this article.

He says the polite competition of the pub crowd is far more civilized than the brutal numerocracy of the queue.

This gentle chaos assumes that people are good and gives them the opportunity to confirm it, to make space for those who are less able to reach the bar, to arrange themselves with nods and winks.

The Q assumes that everybody is bad.

It's interesting because a Brit would be the first to complain when they go to like one of these countries where there's just chaos everywhere and there are no lines, you know, they would call it uncivilized.

So he's just like, he wants to essentially be like one of these developing countries that we've all been to where there's chaos he wants to save that for the bar um yes and i guess if everything else in your life is so orderly you need a little room for the chaos of the pub but when i used to go to spanish church as a kid and and it was funny how when you're trying to enter or leave you would get like a old lady elbow in your back like to just to to get past you because it was every person for themselves.

And then we'd go to the white church and it was like, oh, everybody's just slowly waiting for everybody else to go.

You want a little chaos, dear Brit?

You want to complain that the rest of the world is uncivilized when they don't queue for everything else?

You want to keep your pub messy because, you know what?

We all like a little messiness.

It's not our fault, though, that you've removed all of the messiness from your public life in every other interview.

You know what they say is, he wants to shoot from the car every once in a while.

Every once in a while, you should shoot from the car.

Wait, what is that?

The Hemingway story.

Oh, right.

Look at you.

You barely read any Hemingway.

Now you're just The Hemingway story.

Oh, right.

Look at you.

Like you barely read any Hemingway.

Now you're just dropping Hemingway references.

We're all supposed to get it.

But, you know, that strikes me as ultimately British where he's like so dead set on the rules.

And then when given an instance where he's breaking the rules, yeah, but you could do that sometimes.

Yeah, exactly.

But just don't talk about it.

That's the only thing.

Just don't talk about it.

That's their number one rule is that you just don't talk about it.

Can you imagine after you finally get your beer, you call the bartender over and you go, hey, so like, how come you didn't pick me earlier?

Yeah.

Or thank you for getting me like uh before that other person they seem like kind of an asshole yeah the worst is when you get to the bar and there's like boom you look down the bar and there's just nothing but attractive young women yeah then you just know you're never you just like yeah you deserve to be last because you're old and ugly i'd like to hear from our bartender listeners like i want to know what the bartender rules in their head are what's your code, what are your norms as bartenders for things like this it is kind of a cool little cultural practice you get that little nod, just like the tiniest head movement in eye contact it feels so good if you get that eye contact, and they're sometimes very good at avoiding eye contact when I'm getting a little too impatient, like i start really trying to meet their eyes it's like they're like dodging it like spider-man like dodging bullets or something they're so good at it yeah it reminds me of what my friend sabine once told me about a poster session when you're walking through and you see all the students and you're just like you don't want to make any eye contact because they get all like excited he said it was like an abused animal shelter're just like, you don't want to make any eye contact because they get all like excited.

He said it was like an abused animal shelter where you like go, you don't want to get any of them excited that they might get taken.

They might get taken.

So much empathy for, uh, for grad students.

The last thing I wanted to ask you about is, so he says, you know, we have this kind of perfect little tradition.

Why has Britain succumbed to the monstrous idea of queuing for a pint?

He like looks at some possible alternatives, like people infantilized by the internet.

But, you know, ages were 18 to 24 or 65 and over for being in favor.

Political stuff, I don't totally understand their parties.

So I'm not going to try to.

There's more than two.

They have more than two.

Yeah, I know.

We should try that.

My own theory is that this is a result of a society that has been aggressively deprofessionalized by market forces and technology in which formerly well-respected jobs such as driving a cab or staffing a shop have been replaced by a low-paid precariat whose presence is temporary and who, having seen their autonomy outsourced to software, have no real interest in the job anyway.

You don't see a GP.

You see a physician associate.

Your conveyance won't actually be done by a lawyer.

Your news comes from social media.

You write to your MP and get a reply from Chad TBT.

Capital has dissolved the old structures of employment status, and now no one trusts a barman to decide who gets the next round.

That sounds right to me.

Like, down the line, actually.

Is this like an alienation argument?

It's not just alienation as much as I think.

Yeah, or it is.

Like they've alienated all these people from their labor so that you don't take pride in being like a good publican.

It's not a source of pride to be that.

You're not going to get paid well to do it because they can just pay somebody else who's not as good to do it much less.

But to deal with that, now you have to set up a line because this person has no idea like how to navigate something like that.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

It's like the, you know, the Uber, the Ubering of the world.

You can't trust them.

Yeah.

I like it too.

So I'm OK with this argument.

Let the barman have a career of choosing who among us is worthy of a beer.

Yeah.

Like give them some autonomy and give us some autonomy.

Who's worthy of that warm, warm British beer?

Yeah, the bitter.

I really couldn't believe it when I had it when I was there.

It's very weird.

It's very weird.

It's warm.

It has like when I was there.

It's very weird.

It's very weird.

It's warm.

It has like virtually no carbonation.

It's not good.

But, you know, the pub is not a practical place, as he says.

Yeah, I think you're right, actually.

And he says at the end, like in other more mechanistic areas of life, there are practical reasons to queue.

Like I think he's talking about the mechanization of everything.

And we are becoming just parts in a machine, all working for capital.

I like this idea that we always want a little bit of chaos in our life.

That there is something primal that gets us to feel more alive when there's just a little bit less order.

Yeah.

All right.

Good.

Well, the next opening segment, maybe we'll talk about Southwest no longer doing open seating on their airplanes.

Oh, God.

Oh.

Wait, I didn't know.

Yeah.

Which actually I'm fine with.

Yes.

All right.

We'll be right back to talk about shame.

Dream.

Thank you.

I'm starting this out differently this time.

I just wanted to say sincerely, thank you to everybody who is listening.

Whether you've been a longtime listener, whether you just started listening to us, or whether you sometimes listen, sometimes don't, all of that really matters.

And we appreciate it.

We wouldn't be here without you listeners.

And you're supporting us by just listening.

Even if you don't realize how much you're supporting us by just listening, even if you don't realize how much you're doing it, it really means a lot to us.

If you want to support us by reaching out to us, by communicating with us, you can do that by emailing us verybadwizards at gmail.com or tweeting to us at Tamler at P's or at verybadwizards.

You can do social media stuff, join the subreddit, reddit.com slash r slash verybadwizards.

You can talk to us on Instagram at verybadwizards.

And if you want to give us feedback that the rest of the world will see, you can always go to Apple Podcasts or Spotify.

Give us a rating.

Leave us a review.

Good reviews are always appreciated.

And it's always been a priority of ours to keep our podcast absolutely free.

It's not paywalled or anything like that.

Anybody who wants to listen can listen.

But if you appreciate us and have the budget to do so, and you want to support us financially, we very much appreciate it.

I don't know if we'd last 13 or 14 years or whatever we've been doing this without this kind of support.

You can, of course, go to our support page and see the various ways in which you can help us out.

You can donate to us via PayPal.

You can buy some swag, t-shirts, other clothing.

You can get some mugs.

Or you can join our Patreon.

And if you do, you get something in return.

And you get to be part of a community that is a wonderful community that we really enjoy interacting with.

There are various tiers there.

$2 per month and up, you get all of our episodes ad-free, like our total back catalog and you get access to my little beat compilations, nine of those.

At $5 a month and up, you get all of our bonus content.

That is tons and tons of back catalog of us talking about movies, TV shows, having other guests on.

All that is available to you hundreds of hours, including to listening to our monthly Ask Us Anything segment, other podcasts that we've done, the Reintegrators with Paul Bloom, and our Deadwood podcast, The Ambulators, all that's available to you at $5 a month and up.

At $10 a month and up, you get all of that.

Plus, you get to vote on an episode topic that we do a couple of episodes a year, things that our Patreon listeners suggest and then vote on.

You get access to our Brothers Karamazov five-part series.

You get some of my inter-psych lecture videos and a couple of Tamler's lectures on Plato's Symposium.

That's all there.

And finally, at $20 a month and up, you get all that stuff, plus you get to be the ones to ask us anything once a month.

You can give us a question.

We'll answer it.

And you also get to watch us answer those unedited YouTube, or sorry, video version of our AUA.

Once again, thank you to everybody for your support, social, moral, financial, all of the other ways you can think of.

We really appreciate it.

now back to the episode all right now let's move on to our main segment which is an article by the cultural psychologist richard schwader called toward a deep cultural psychology of shame it was published in social research an international quarterly journal i don't think i knew about in 2003 Let me just give a brief introduction to Schwader and what cultural psychology is because he actually comes from a really interesting perspective.

He's trained as an anthropologist and sort of became a cultural psychologist by just being interested in specifically how culture shapes the human psyche.

So whereas anthropologists might be interested in all sorts of things like cultural customs and languages, he was just specifically interested in how it shapes the human mind with that real anthropological sort of perspective that there is not a universal human mind.

It doesn't make sense to speak of human universals.

What's better to speak of is what role culture plays in shaping basic psychological processes.

And then in turn, how psychology influences cultures.

So that's where he's coming from.

And I really appreciate his perspective as somebody from anthropology doing psychological research.

I think that he has contributed more for moral psychology than a lot of psychologists have.

And so the way that I was introduced to Schweder and his work in cultural psychology in general was reading his book on cultural psychology in college, but then early in graduate school reading an article that he wrote on specifically moral judgment across cultures.

And Schweder did most of his work.

All of his research really was done in India, looking at a small town in India, in particular a Hindu temple there specifically.

And he interviewed in-depth interviews with people of different socioeconomic statuses in Chicago, where he's at the University of Chicago, and people of different social classes in India, and just ask them a bunch of questions about their moral judgments and put it together in what I think is this wonderful article, Schweder, Mahapdra, and Miller in 1987, where you get this rich, rich sense of what people's moral views are, everything from which actions are considered the most wrong, which are the least wrong, and then a nice comparison across cultures about what is shared and what isn't across cultures, across socioeconomic status, across caste.

That kind of shit you just didn't see, and you don't see now, especially now with trolleyology and all that.

So this approach of really seeing through cultures, like trying to understand the mind through the lens of how culture shapes it, I think is a really interesting and valuable one.

When you say because of trolleyology, you mean now what they would do cross-culturally is they would just give them prisoners' dilemmas or trolley problems or things like that, like Gettier cases.

Yeah, and there are people doing really like actual cultural moral psychology where they're they're looking at differences maybe in real life moral situations but it's become so much like let's do it on m turk or do it on prolific collect it over the internet nobody does what schwer and his team did, which is not just go and interview these people, but go and live with them.

So you even know what to ask.

You even know how to ask it.

That kind of deep understanding.

Is this like thick ethnography or something like that?

There's some word like thick, just actually talking to them and not giving them some kind of artificial thing, but just talking to them, interviewing them, just compiling, like a more ethnography kind of approach.

And you don't see this, you're saying, as much.

I mean, Joe Henrik would sometimes combine both, although he was more on the side of these kinds of experiments.

Yeah, I think Joe Henrik is a good example, somebody who really respects the cultural tradition, but it's still the case, like that a lot of his work of his work was looking at these dictator games or whatever these economic games were to try to measure people that way.

And that is different than just asking them in conversation a bunch of questions.

Even the how to translate a word, which we'll get into when he's talking about shame, is something that you can't really grok until you've spent some time understanding the concept.

It's real easy to just get, you get one informant or one translator that gives you this word and you just run with it.

And you haven't really understood the concept.

And actually very relevant to this, you might just assume that we all share the meaning in all sorts of ways and not realize that there are nuances to the concept in that culture that really do not translate at all.

And you might be surprised.

Yeah.

Just to ward off all the Joe Henrik heads who are yelling at their speakers and going to write us angry emails.

I did read a great book of his called Why Humans Cooperate.

And the whole point of that is partly methodological where you combine these experiments with a rich ethnography which i think his wife does or somebody he knows very well and like use all of the tools at the hands of science yeah that's fair i think he does it right i mean you know he's also looking more at evolutionary universals.

Yeah.

And so I think he has more of a reason to try to to study basic processes by using some standardized some of these standardized ways.

But, yeah, I don't by any means think that he is being like flippantly giving people trolley problems.

But for someone like Schwader, the goal really isn't to find universals to begin with.

He makes it clear in this article that he thinks there are universals, but they're less interesting to him.

And maybe we overstate them as psychologists.

And this article, as I see it, is trying to even figure out, like, how do you determine whether to call something universal or not?

And that's one of the more interesting aspects of it.

more interesting aspects of it.

Yeah.

So the last thing I'll say broadly about Schrader is that his influence in moral psychology is really clear and direct in that he came up with this sort of community autonomy, divinity distinction with it of sort of what cultures value in their ethical frameworks.

And that directly led, you know, John Haidt studied with Schrader, that all directly led or influenced deeply the whole moral foundations literature.

Yeah, I mean, like Haidt basically just added first one foundation and then two more, I think.

But yeah, he carried on that tradition.

But Schrader always seemed a little bit still resistant to, from my memory of it.

Totally.

Like making it too systematic like that.

Yeah.

like making it too systematic like that.

Yeah.

I interacted with Schrader once when he gave a talk at a conference at Northwestern University on moral psych stuff.

And I was like so stoked because that article that he wrote really kind of solidified my desire to go into moral psychology.

And I really was excited to tell him.

And something funny happened.

I asked a question that I think he took as me being kind of like mean spirited or challenging.

I don't know.

And I asked a question that I think he took as me being kind of like mean spirited or challenging.

I don't know.

And then I told him, you know what?

That article that you wrote, like really totally shifted my, you know, my interests.

And you could just see his face like all of a sudden turn and just like become friendly.

And he's just so appreciated.

And this is just as a general rule.

No one will ever not want to hear a nice thing about the research.

It doesn't matter and i thought like schwader is like this huge deal why does he give a shit if like i liked his article or not um but when i talked to him about this community autonomy divinity stuff i mentioned this work by paul rosin yeah where they link community autonomy divinity to these these three different emotions like disgust anger and and he hated it.

He was like, that wasn't me.

I had nothing to do with it.

He clearly thought they were like systematizing it too much or claiming some sort of universal stuff too much.

Yeah.

So he kept the anthropologist in him.

Yeah, exactly.

So in this article, he's reporting on the work that he has built on the work that he did in India, looking at moral judgment in this group, but specifically about this emotion of shame.

And he's taking sort of a cultural psychology framework to try to understand how we make sense of cultural differences or universals when it comes to emotion.

And I like the way that he starts out.

He starts out by saying, like, imagine that somebody came up to you and said, isn't it interesting that in this culture, the word shame means like being super proud of like one of your achievements or something like that.

And he says, you would think that that's, they just got it wrong.

Right.

He says, so what do we make?

Like, how should we approach an understanding of emotion that takes into account cultural differences, but that also tries to maintain that sense that we have that like, there is something about shame that is universal and conceptually at least where you could be just using it wrong.

Like it's not completely a hundred percent culturally determined.

There is something about the concept shame that we all agree like ought to be present whenever we use that concept because shame is shame.

And so that's the starting point for this article where he says, what do we make of that analytic approach that wants to say there is a universal, at least definition of what we mean by shame?

And then what do we do with all of this approach that he favors, which is really trying to understand what cultural differences, how they shape, what kinds of emotions we have.

The example that he uses of somebody saying, oh yeah, in this, you know, these Brahmin families of the Araya language speaking, shame means for them the good feeling that people have when they manage to acquire the things they want most in life and they can display it to the community.

So we would know something's off there, but it's actually a little tricky to try to pin down exactly what's wrong with that.

So like, I'm not saying it's definitely wrong.

It sounds incoherent.

It sounds like we're just using terms differently or something like that.

But to figure out where to draw the line, if you're going to acknowledge that there are going to be cultural differences in the meaning of shame across cultures, then it requires like some kind of minimal definition of it that like, so we all know we're kind of talking about the same thing, but it can't be too specific so that it will be completely different culture to culture and it will start to look unrecognizable to other cultures as the experience of shame.

So you need what he calls a minimal mandatory meaning of shame if you're going to even engage in the project of studying cultural differences about it.

Yeah.

So he says that there's a hermeneutic principle that the abstract idea of shame is what it is, means what it means, and therefore must convey at least that minimal meaning wherever you happen to be on the globe.

It's like, you can think of clear cases where if somebody said, oh, did you know that the word pain in Spanish means like when you feel really good?

You'd be like, well, you're just talking about something completely different.

You're translating it wrong.

You're translating it wrong.

You're translating it wrong.

You got something wrong with something like an emotion where you, there probably is just a lot more difference in all sorts of things.

Like you said, you need to know like, where do we draw this line?

And I like this approach because he's not making an empirical claim about the universal of shame.

He's more sort of saying we have to have a minimal understanding of the definition so that we know we're talking about the same thing so that we can even begin to see where differences might emerge.

And it might be that like that emotion doesn't exist, you know, in the Uriya Brahmins, but you need some like common ground.

Yeah.

And it's funny, like it's not clear how to determine it exactly.

Like basically what he does is survey a couple in detail, different conceptions of shame.

One of the mutiny on the bounty episode and Colonel Bly and, you know, like his conception of shame versus the conception of shame by Jenna Malamud Smith, which are completely different.

We don't have to get into the details of that.

So basically that's the way he gets at the minimal meaning is just by like seeing, okay, what are the common denominators of here is two people who like speak English.

So we know that the words are the same, at least, but they have a totally different conception.

What's the overlap there?

And let's use that.

But it's like, yeah, I don't know if there's a principle of trying to land on that minimal meaning.

Yeah.

I don't know either.

You know, he calls it explicitly the analytical approach and it's not unlike doing analytical philosophy.

Like conceptual analysis.

Yeah, I don't know either.

He calls it explicitly the analytical approach, and it's not unlike doing analytical philosophy.

Like conceptual analysis.

Yeah, exactly.

It's conceptual analysis, trying to find what everybody has in common.

So let's read the definition.

Yeah, so he says, if one tries to summarize or synthesize these various views so as to form an abstract idea of shame, or what amounts to the same thing, so as to describe the underlying concept that sets a mandatory limit on all conceivable definitions of shame or what amounts to the same thing so as to describe the underlying concept that sets a mandatory limit on all conceivable definitions of shame one might say that shame is the deeply felt and highly motivating experience of the fear of being judged defective it's the anxious experience of either the real or anticipated loss of status affection or self-regard that results from knowing that one is vulnerable to the disapproving gaze or negative judgments of others.

What did you make of that?

I think that sounds very good as a starting point to me.

I like the way he describes it.

Maybe it's a little melodramatic to say the terror that touches the mind, the body, and the soul.

As Otto Renk showed, as Otto Renk conclusively demonstrated.

Beyond any possible doubt, that shame is the deeply felt and highly motivating experience of the fear of being judged defective.

Yeah.

You know, like I'm doing an independent study right now on shame.

Oh, yeah.

We should say that's how we got started talking about this.

That's how we did.

Yeah.

We just started, but we read Bernard Williams' Shame and Necessity.

And I like this idea, and earlier where he talks about all the different features of it, like what it makes you want to do, the phenomenology that you feel in the body, the other emotions that it might generate, the way we communicate shame, like both feeling it ourselves or thinking someone else should feel it.

All of the way we communicate shame, like both feeling it ourselves or thinking someone else should feel it.

All of this are aspects of it.

So then when you're going for the bare minimum meaning, it's like you really want something broad.

And I think that's a good one, you know?

Yeah.

I actually want to talk a little bit more about those features.

I mean, this is one of the ways in which Schwader, I think, just does this right.

Just carving the emotional space is kind of weird.

Yes.

It's a difficult thing to do.

It's like, how do you determine what is an emotion and where to divide it?

So sometimes I give the analogy of the spectrum of visible light.

You can slice it up.

We pick the terms red, blue, green, but who's to say where you carve up the spectrum and label it?

Maybe that's what emotions are.

Some people argue it's much more universal.

There are these super evolved things like fear that are a natural selection solution to a specific set of recurring problems that aid in survival, and it's a natural kind.

And I think that Schwader is at least taking the psychology of emotion and philosophy of emotion and looking at what do we mean when we say that something is an emotion.

And these are all things that are in the literature.

So what are the antecedents?

What are the things that tend to make you feel this way?

Like, is there any similarity in the situations?

What are the appraisals that you're making about the environment around you, whether it be people or the things?

Like, are they negative?

Is it blocking a goal that you're pursuing?

You know, there are all these appraisal theories that really focus on what are these appraisals that you're making that give rise to different emotions?

And you can divide up different emotions by looking at what these appraisals are.

So an appraisal that somebody did something wrong and you have some control over that, like leads to anger, right?

The bodily feelings, like that's a big one.

Like what does it feel like in the body?

And then just what does it feel like, as he says, affectively?

These are all things that really are, you try to take a broad look at all these things and say, okay.

Now, if I look at this, I can say with some sense that there is such a thing as shame and there is such a thing as guilt and there's this anger and there's fear because they all seem to, they're like a family at least of emotions.

they're like a family at least of emotions.

And what I really like is that what he ends up at is at least a shell, a conceptual shell, that can then be filled in by the cultural stuff.

Yeah, and then the rest of the paper is showing the different ways it can be filled in.

The way he leads into these seven components, he says, it can be helpful to separate the following components of a complete emotional episode.

And I thought there was something weird about that phrase.

What is a complete emotional episode?

It's like a fainting spell.

Right.

But I get what he's trying to do, but that's why this makes my brain hurt.

I have a hard time wrapping my head around what exactly it is that we're doing you know like this is saying that here are seven components of any complete emotional episode that you would have but how do you know that something is a complete emotional episode versus a partial most uh emotional right so it really does require like, you know, you have to grant certain premises to get to other premises.

Yeah, no, you're right.

And here's like a stab at answering a small part of that question, which is at least when people talk about emotions, they often are referring to like and when they distinguish it from something like a mood or some other form of motivation, they say, okay, emotions are these things that happen that make us feel a certain way.

They motivate us to act in a certain way.

They give us certain bodily changes and they change our appraisals of the world.

And they're fundamentally about something and they only last a minimal amount of time.

Unlike a mood, which is you can be in a bad mood and not know why you're in a bad mood.

And that bad mood can persist for the whole day.

Like when you say I'm afraid, you're afraid of that thing.

And when that thing is gone, it's sort of over.

And I think that's all he means by an episode as like pointing to the relatively short duration and object specific kind of episodes we have.

Yeah.

So then on this account, is like being sad or feeling kind of depressed not an emotion?

Some people would call that a mood.

Yeah.

But I guess it just depends.

But I think people would call it an emotion.

Certainly the people who made Inside Out would call it an emotion.

Right.

But as we heard from Vox, while that might have been great cinema, it wasn't good philosophy of mine.

Actually, that's interesting.

I was thinking this when we were reading this, because some of the appraisal stuff that he's talking about is from that tradition of basic emotions and that tradition that gave rise to Inside Out.

Yeah, the Ekman stuff.

And there is a psychologist, Dacher Keltner, who was a consultant on the Inside Out movies.

He had paid the big bucks by Pixar and basically told them all this Ekman stuff about basic emotions.

And so I was thinking as we were reading this, we're going to hear from the Lisa Feldman Barrett people.

Oh yeah, that's who I was thinking of when we read this.

Because, right, and it's been a while since we looked at that.

So, but my memory of it is she was worried that we come up with these words and just start reifying these terms.

That's right.

Which then just completely infects how we approach the problem.

I see Schwader here is a little bit trying to navigate this problem, but I don't think you can fully navigate it because I don't know if it's like a solvable problem.

Like that is always a possibility.

And so then the question is, well, what do you do about that?

Like we have to just agree on something if we're going to study this at all, I guess is the idea.

Yeah.

It's a tricky thing because somebody like Schwader, you'd think would be really predisposed to say, oh, yeah, like Feldman Barrett says, there's no such thing as a natural kind for an emotion.

This is all just sort of culturally constructed.

But that's not what he's saying, really, at all.

Feldman Barrett is more extreme about this.

She really thinks it doesn't make sense to have the category fear or whatever.

this.

She really thinks that it doesn't make sense to have the category fear or whatever.

Schrader, I think, is being, I side with him because he's saying, look, it could be that it's a natural kind, but it's a conceptual natural kind.

It just makes sense to say that there is this thing called shame that has these components.

And you can ask the question whether everybody in the world feels it, but you don't need to have an evolutionary story.

You don't need to have like a brain story.

You don't need to see like the natural kind in the in the fMRI.

You don't need to like have such a clean, neat story about the evolution of it.

But humans feel shame.

Yeah.

But you can read like the Iliad and you can read the Panchatantra and you can read like anything that's going on right now in various different parts of the world.

And they will talk about something that roughly approximates to the deeply felt and highly motivating experience of the fear of being judged effective.

And so like, you know, you can say, well, that's not a natural kind, which I'm fine saying, but if everybody still has that in some form, then we can still investigate it, whether or not we call it a natural kind or not.

You don't have to take a stand.

And like you say, you definitely don't have to take a stand on like a nature nurture thing or whether this is evolutionary, like it has an evolutionary function.

Although it's not hard to think what that might be.

But yeah, it's interesting methodologically, very philosophy of language also.

I feel like what's going on in this paper.

You kind of get sucked into that when you study emotions because, you know, and here's where it starts to get blurry where, okay, say you have this minimal mandatory definition.

Here's like one of the things that I wanted to ask you, because there's a literature on this where you, you want to know what distinctions people are making, like just regular normal people.

And so if I asked you to tell me what the difference is between shame and guilt, like what would you say off the top of your head?

Well, there's a couple, you know, this is something I talk about in the book, actually like relative justice and why honor matters.

So there's two different ways of conceptualizing this.

One is the idea that shame is about something about you.

Guilt is about what you did.

So shame, it's very much about your self-conception and like what yourself is looking like to other people.

Whereas with guilt, it's like, well, yourself is the same, but you did this terrible thing.

And so the things that follow from that might be different.

Like with guilt, you might be trying to make up for it.

With shame, you have to do some more reconstructive work of who you are and stuff as a way of addressing or what you're motivating.

as a way of addressing it or what you're motivating.

So that's one way of doing it.

So that's one way of doing it.

The other is, I think, maybe less instructive, but what's big in the time where they're talking about the distinction between shame cultures and guilt cultures, this comes from Ruth Benedict in her book, The Chrysanthemum and the Sword, where she contrasted Japan as a shame culture and us as a guilt culture.

Later, that sometimes got cashed out as dignity culture.

But the shame culture is very concerned with your reputation, your face, you know.

And so when you feel a drop in status, you feel shame and a shame culture.

But guilt is more about individuals, how you feel about yourself.

And it doesn't matter, you know, as much in a guilt culture, what other people think of you, it's more like, have you lived up to the values that you, but those things, all of this stuff actually can blur a lot.

Like shame can motivate feelings of trying to offer compensation, repair, repair relationships and guilt can make you sometimes want to disappear into the floor or like figure out what's wrong with you.

Like, so it's, yeah, I don't have a clean distinction, but, but I guess it's the, over the act and over something about you that to me makes the most sense.

Me too.

Me too.

And, and in these, like when they survey at least English speaking people, that seems to be the distinction that they're making when they use the words.

But like you said, it's blurry because sometimes I think that people, when they say guilt, they mean shame.

Like when they say that like, oh, don't live your life in guilt.

They're not really talking about like specific guilt over acts like that you might like violated.

I think they think that you're negatively evaluating yourself like Freudian guilt of some sort, like you're living with this like baggage and there it's like, okay, I don't think there's a right answer.

You just want to at least be able to make the distinctions and you know, whatever you call it, it's like the difference between jealousy and envy, which is I think a reasonable distinction that we make in our language where jealousy is something that you have is like threatened.

Somebody else might take it versus envy is wanting what other people have but in everyday life people use those terms i learned that like when i was 45 or something yeah that was in the way that uh people talked about it yeah i mean the one like i think clear kind of case is like you wouldn't feel guilty about oh i taught this whole lecture in front of 300 people with my fly down yeah you might feel ashamed but then it's like but is that shame or is that embarrassment yeah that's a that's a tricky distinction too that that is and you know in spanish that's they're both the same word yeah and like meduensai is the word used for shame and embarrassment and i was doing a little bit of reading about this to prepare.

And it seems as if embarrassment really does seem like a matter of degree, both like how bad it was and how bad, like whatever norm or rule or whatever you violated, how serious it was or how moral it was or whatever, where usually by embarrassment, we mean something like kind of temporary that was in the situation.

That's not that big a deal.

So it's like very low grade shame or something.

Exactly.

Yeah.

It's like temporary low grade shame.

Yeah.

But it does seem like as someone who is often embarrassed, but never lets it affect like my self-conception, probably to a a fault like it is something different in terms of do you feel like this reflects badly on you as a person yeah but i think even there you could just say i think it reflects a little badly that i would like like a whole lecture with my fly down or something like that you know so like yeah these things are tough at the margins but that's okay i guess right right yeah yeah I think that's fine.

I think that the trick is to offer clarity when discussing these things.

And this is why I think some of the clarity that is being offered here is valuable.

So when Schrader does start talking about the mutiny on the bounty and whatever this person wrote about this sort of like a reframing of the story by saying, you know, Captain Bly wasn't like the bad guy.

He was just sort of living in an era where the things that he valued, like the, the code that he lived by was starting to be devalued by everybody else around him.

And so when people sort of like reacted to him and did whatever.

Do you commit mutiny?

What do you do?

Mutinize.

Whenever they mutinized him, they were thinking that the way that he was acting was actually wrong and bad when in fact he was acting just out of a different code.

And he uses this to sort of emphasize that when you have this minimal definition, it doesn't give you the details about what sorts of things might give rise to the emotion, right?

It matters what you value.

Like what you're ashamed about will matter deeply, depending, like it will be distinct across cultures that value different aspects of morality, of social life.

And so if you want to talk about what, like across cultures, what people are feeling when they feel shame, you can't just point to that universal definition and leave it at that.

You have to understand what are the differences that might be giving rise to this.

And I like this case because it shows within one culture that might actually be changing, like before your eyes, like the older guy had a real different set of values that gave rise to shame over a completely different reason.

Does that make sense?

Yeah, but I think there's two different kinds of things.

There's going to be variation of the kinds of things, like the norms, the values that lead people to feel ashamed or not.

And that's the case with Bly is that he was in one value system, but his crew was in a different value system in Tahiti.

But then there's another kind of variation where it's more than that.

It's more than the norms are different, that when you violate it, you might feel shame.

It's more just, well, yeah, I think it's actually harder to specify.

But one thing that was, I thought, interesting in the Williams, the shame and necessity, where he looks at the way people talk about shame in Homer and in the Greek tragedies is, so they didn't have a word for guilt, right?

They just had a word for shame.

It's not that that culture is unrecognizable to us because they didn't have this word for guilt.

And so they never had those kinds of feelings at all.

Or they never focused on this particular action that they thought didn't reflect on them as their identity.

But it's something they regret or something that they feel like they need to compensate.

They had all that, he says.

But it is different to be in a culture where there's no word for guilt versus one where there is a word for guilt.

And that's a different kind of variation than, oh, well, there you would feel shame because you didn't kill enough people and enslave enough women.

And here it's like, you know, that those would be shameful things.

Yeah.

I think that's totally right.

And this is where, you know, one of the things, and I think Feldman Barrett argues this too, but one of the things about these emotions is we have like these social scripts about what happened, what's going to happen, what should happen, all of those things.

And so when you have like the shared word for shame that encompasses the guilt stuff, I think you'd be more likely to do the kinds of appeasement behaviors that are associated with shame as a way of dealing with what we might call guilt over something bad that you did.

Because you would have just the one script.

And it does remind me, back to the color example, there are cultures that don't have words that distinguish green and blue.

There are cultures that don't have lots of color words, they can see the colors.

Like, it's not that they can't see the colors, but when you ask them to like sort chips, like color swatches or whatever, they put green and blue in the same pile.

But obviously if you tell them like, they'll say, yeah, that's a different shade than this, but it influences how they like think about color, how they act about these colors.

Like there's a lot that is infused when you are working with sort of this one definition.

So that's a good analogy, but sticking with that analogy, like I would ask you, like, do you think they have a different phenomenology when they see the color, even if it's, it doesn't mean that they think it's the same as that color.

Do they have a different phenomenology not have?

Cause I think what Williams is, I mean, he's trying to find a balance, but he's saying there might be a little bit of a difference in phenomenology.

That doesn't mean it's unrecognizable.

It doesn't mean they just lump all these things together, but it does mean that, that it is a little different to experience those kinds of things that we might call guilt and they would still call some subset of shame.

It's a little different in terms of the ways that you might act or something like, but not fully.

And so I feel like that might be true with color too, right?

You know, yes, they can tell that there's a difference, but they still maybe see it differently than someone that has a word for cerulean blue or something like that.

Right.

Like I feel like I don't see colors that well because I don't know too much about different colors.

Yeah, I agree.

Like we could get into the definition of C, but I actually think that you don't even need to because I think you could see the same thing physically and have different phenomenology.

And as an example, like I would say, even within English, people like you and me, we see like a bunch of different shades of pink and we just think of them as like, oh yeah, those are all pinks.

But if you're like a designer and you have to work with fabrics of different colors, or if you're like a web designer and you have to like know the different codes for the different colors, you might really say like, oh look, there's a fuchsia, there's hot pink, there's magenta, there's salmon.

And I think that actually means that you're experiencing the colors differently.

I agree.

Yeah.

And I think the same for emotions where there are individual differences in how good people's concepts of emotions are, or at least how granular they are.

So I think some people really can say like, oh, I'm feeling, you know, a bit of resentment, but also some sadness about this.

And there are people like maybe more men who would be like, I feel bad.

So what bad do you feel?

I don't know.

I just feel bad.

And I think that more than color even would affect your phenomenology.

Yeah.

I mean, I wouldn't put it in such a gender essentialist way, but...

I meant trans women too.

Okay.

So no, but I think that's absolutely right.

And I think, like, people who work on their, you know, like, through therapy or maybe meditation or whatever, who can get a more fine-grained understanding of their emotions, which will, like, make the emotions feel differently.

Yeah.

Okay.

So as a way of giving another example from his own research on the cultural differences between Oriya Indian speakers, he says like, okay, there is this word that he had introduced at the beginning, and it does seem to be a shame-like emotion.

But the way that he talks about this is super interesting.

And I remember in his book, I think him talking about it, he specifically talks about a 15th century heroic Oriya story called the Chandipurana.

This is Mahi Sarusa is, I guess, a kind of god who is also terrorizing the other male gods.

He's like a demon.

He's like a demon that I guess they kind of pacified or they, what's the word?

It's like what Chamberlain did to Hitler.

They kept, you know, kind of giving in.

Right, right, right.

They just kept complying with, and then all of a sudden he becomes like a huge bully and powerful.

And he says, I don't want to die at the hands of any man.

And so the gods say, okay, well, that's fine.

No man will kill you, but a woman will kill you at some point.

Because their gods are not immortal, which is kind of interesting.

They live for a really, really long time, but they do die.

They say they must also die one day.

And it will be at the hands of a woman.

So then the demon, Mahisarusa, Masisasura, sorry, Masisasura says, all right, well, if I'm going to die at the hands of a woman, grant me the boon that I shouldn't die until I have beheld her naked breasts and her bare genitals.

And like, I just don't know why they have to grant any of these things, but they do.

Yeah, they've given him 80,000 years of penance.

And at the end of that, they're like feeling a little bad.

Like, all right, we'll give you these boons.

So then now he's out of control and they have to stop him.

You could make some analogies here, political analogies, which would probably get us canceled by ABC, so I won't say them.

But anyway, they grant him the wish and then they can't stop him.

So then a great goddess is created, Sarala Dasa, is that right?

Yeah, I don't know.

To fight this person.

but they don't tell her about that one thing she can only be killed by a naked woman um they leave that out of the story she has to find out because some other female like spilled the tea to her yes and that's how she finds out that the only way that she can defeat this horrible demon is to kill him while she's naked.

Yeah.

So she strips naked, exposes her genitals to the demon's eyes, and then kills him on the spot.

So then, because none of this has touched the idea of shame yet, so there is this subsequent scene where they go down there to the great goddess, who I guess is named Durga, with offerings.

And they find her just there, like lying naked in the street.

And they were overcome with lagia.

They could not draw nearer.

And the goddess exclaimed in rage, there shall be no male gods left in heaven.

None shall remain unslain today.

You give the demons such boons that they destroy three worlds.

Would I have had to disrobe myself if there had not been such gods in heaven?

And then they all run away except for Siva, the goddess future husband, who must now find a way to diminish the goddess's rage at the stupid, untrustworthy gods.

And so that's one version of the story.

But then the other version of the story is that it's the goddess herself who's overcome with Lajia, enraged at having to expose the sexual parts of her body to the demon in order to save the world.

She decides the world does not deserve to be saved.

And in the form of Kali, she goes on a mad rampage of destruction, killing and wrecking everything in sight.

Which is like that, you know, that image of Kali, which like lots of hands and like holding the head of a man.

Yeah, it's gnarly.

It's always has scared me.

Sounds like they have it coming.

Yeah.

So here in order to stop her rampage, Siva, who in this version is already her husband, lies down on a road because she's going to walk that road, and sort of like makes her step on him without noticing.

And it turns out that stepping on your husband is an act of great disrespect, which I don't know how killing the whole world isn't, but I guess stepping on your husband is.

And I see that.

That seems right.

You can't step on your husband.

She notices what she did, and she's overcome with Lajia.

And this is what like stops her rampage.

She's like, causes her to regain her composure, cooler anger, and transform herself back into protective rather than destructive force.

So here the shame is serving an important function of like sort of stopping the bad behavior that's going on.

Which I think is interesting and resonates with what shame might be doing.

The function of shame.

Exactly.

But in the original case, it was the gods that had Lajia, and that just caused them to want to kind of pull back from her.

Right.

Because they saw her naked and they weren't supposed to.

Yeah.

So those are two different things.

But one thing I wanted to ask you about is nakedness and shame clearly have some like intimate connection like you don't you just read like the first or second chapter of genesis or whatever it is where they eat the apple and they feel shame for the first time and yeah nakedness is just such a big part of it, but it is very different.

Like being seen naked is very different of a feeling.

It seems like then, oh, I just stepped on my husband and did something kind of shameful.

So it's kind of interesting.

I think even like for us, you know, separating like the cultural difference that he's getting at right now.

It is funny that we have the same word for two such seemingly different things.

Like I let down my fellow soldier in battle and someone came in and saw me naked.

Yeah, that is interesting.

It almost seems like a different thing to me, the nakedness.

It just feels, it just feels like all of the other kinds of shame I can kind of get that they, they stick together.

They're like, why is it shameful for someone to see you naked?

Because you're not doing anything, right?

Why should you be ashamed?

Is it, is it that there's a chance that you expose yourself publicly when you shouldn't have?

I mean, maybe that's it.

It's just that you've broken a norm of privacy by being like exhibiting yourself and your nakedness.

But I don't know, like, so I would say this is like actually a very, like, it's not painful memory anymore, though it was for a while.

But in fourth grade, the teacher asked me, we're at some pool, like on a field trip, if I had an extra like swimsuit, which I did to give to another student.

And I forget why I had an extra swimsuit, but it was for some reason, like the kid was bigger than me and that swimsuit was bigger.

I had to like switch out of mine and like I did it in front of the whole class and like obviously just like got shipped for elementary school which is in eighth grade like you know like you don't like fourth graders forget that that happened right yeah so it was very painful for a while i mean you know like yeah over these things but like i guess my point is it is a little bit of the same thing as being caught doing something, even though in this case, like I was actually being nice by like helping this poor kid out.

He was some, you know, kid that like normally never gets to do anything.

And I happen to have, for whatever reason, ill fitting for me swimsuit that I was willing to change into to give to this kid.

And yeah, but then I did it and I felt so much shame.

Like if, like, I feel like if that's not shame, then nothing is in some ways, you know, like, but then, but it's so different than shame.

I feel for something like if you showed cowardice in a situation, you shouldn't have.

Yeah.

Right.

It's interesting.

Cause like it gets to this question of if it's a moral emotion, it seems as if it should be elicited when you had some agency over what happened.

But that's not really how shame works.

You can have shame in your family.

Your agency really doesn't matter.

You can be ashamed that you're poor.

You can be ashamed that your family is uneducated.

I'm not saying these are like good things that you should feel shame of, but people do feel shame about these things.

So yeah, I mean, maybe that's like we haven't pinned down the term enough, but it is interesting that it always seems to, in addition to whatever else it encompasses, like it can't get away from nakedness.

Yeah.

Like as kind of its paradigm.

Yeah.

So, okay.

So this story, Schroeder is using it to try to communicate what the Aurea people are referring to when they use this term, Lagia.

And so he goes on to say, Lagia is not well rendered as shy or modest in the contemporary Anglo-American sense.

Shyness, downcast eyes, a veiled face, physical withdrawal from the scene and modesty are associated in the minds of contemporary middle-class Anglo-Americans with concepts such as meek, timid, bashful, mousy, sheepish, shrinking, embarrassed, self-deprecating.

And so on.

This is not true in Oriya Brahmin households.

He says, Lajia lists quite a different set of associations, unpretentious, unobtrusive, reserved, self-restrained, humble, proper, civilized, self-effacing, not brazen, decent, elegant, delicate.

And it's not a characteristic of someone who lacks a strong sense of self.

And this is, again, I think a really nice example of how, yes, we can be using the same broad concept of shame and then pointing out specifically how very different it can be across cultures.

And like the meek and timid thing like is super interesting to me because that is such, it is perceived as a really bad thing.

And in general, shame seems to be like an emotion that we, it is devalued in our society, that it's a bad kind of emotion.

You shouldn't feel it.

Yeah.

Although then there's also a sense that there's a bad kind of emotion you shouldn't feel it yeah although then there's also a sense that there's a rising shamelessness in americans that's also really bad so yeah i think we're a little bit ambivalent about shame as a culture but the point here like you're saying is the things that you might associate with shame not even cause shame but that you associate with shame, not even cause shame, but that you associate with it, like downcast eyes, veiled face, physical withdrawal, that for Americans is concerned with some kind of diminished sense of self.

Whereas with the Uriah Brahmins, it's not a different sense of self.

It's like, this is how you should act.

This is how you- Exactly.

It shows your character that you're feeling shame in this situation.

But see, that's the question, right?

Like, is it that it shows your character that you're feeling shame or is it just, well, yeah, this is where it gets complicated because like, if it's a different set of associations, right?

Humber, proper, civilized, self-effacing, not brazen, decent, elegant, then it's like, proper, civilized, self-effacing, not brazen, decent, elegant.

Then it's like, well, what are you feeling shame about then?

Right?

Like if, if shame, the minimal definition is that you're going to be diminished in the eyes of others, that's what I don't fully get.

You see what I'm saying?

Yeah.

Yeah.

What he might be pointing to is that it's valued differently.

And there is this really super cool work on affective valuation across cultures, which is basically just pointing out that you can have the same emotions, even the same elicitors or whatever, but in some cultures, it's a good thing that you're feeling that, and it's valuable, and it's like an emotion that's appropriate and that you should feel.

And then in other cultures, itness is highly valued.

So there's these really cool studies where they look at children's books and they show that in East Asian children's books, the characters that are doing well, they have these real mellow smiles, real mellow looks.

And then the American ones have these really wide smiles.

I'm like, this is super, we're so crass.

And, and, and so maybe this is a case where, while shame is like undoubtedly like a bad emotion in the sense that like phenomenologically you're like, Oh damn, I'm not good.

It is a signal of something good about you that you're appropriately feeling that shame.

And so it doesn't diminish the person in the same way that Americans or whatever might feel diminished when they feel shame or that we might judge them to be less of the person after they do something shameful.

only issue I have with that, and maybe it's easily addressed, but the mandatory minimum definition he said was the deeply felt and highly motivating experience of the fear of being judged defective and the real or anticipated loss of status, affection or self-regard.

I guess the question is, if it has these associations as being like exactly what you should feel like all the time, not, you know, civilized and all that, it's like, what are you worried that people are going to appraise you badly for?

You know, and maybe it's just a more local kind of situation.

You should always be kind of on the lookout for feeling worried that people are going to judge you.

That's probably what it is, right?

Yeah.

You should always have your sword ready for seppuku.

Yeah.

Right.

You're always worried that you could be's probably what it is, right?

Yeah.

You should always have your sword ready for seppuku.

Yeah, right.

You're always worried that you could be judged.

And we would think that's pathological maybe if you're always like hyper concerned with what people think about you and that you're like saying the wrong thing or you're doing.

And that's still you have a perceived loss of status or whatever or being judged effective.

But they just think it's good to always be worried that you're going to be judged effective yeah or at least to be worried yeah in in a way that shamelessness is like a bad sign yeah yeah that's fair yeah the next paragraph he says the ego of a person with lodges thought to have become enhanced and elevated precisely because of his or her highly cultivated or civilized sense of propriety, knowledge of the roles and rules of society, desire to uphold the social order and sensitive ability to avoid offending the honor of others.

So if that means that you have to like feel like shit because everybody's like judging you every once in a while, that's a good thing.

And it's like the flip side of maybe acting honorably is like when you don't, when you act dishonorably, you really feel it.

Yeah.

And it's very motivating.

Yeah.

I think that this makes a lot of sense to me.

If you talk about just somebody in general, they have a strong sense of shame or they have shamelessness.

It makes less sense if you're talking about a specific incident.

Yeah.

Because if you feel shame over a specific incident, but like everyone thinks you're proper civilized and then it's not, then it doesn't feel like shame anymore.

So I think this is something that's got to apply more generally.

Yeah.

It's interesting because then in some cultures where, where displays of shame are really necessary, you have people faking shame.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So it's not like a real signal, but probably we wouldn't think that much to fake shame.

I'm sorry.

Yeah.

As somebody who I guess grew up in a family where shame was used as a motivator.

So like for my father, I'm sure this is true of a lot of families, but for my father, our actions reflected on the family.

So like if we did something, it really felt being raised as an American, I felt like who the fuck cares if I like speak back to the teacher in a way that gets me in trouble.

That was just shame.

I should have shame.

And my father was concerned about how everybody would think about the family.

What will people think about the family unit given that you did this?

It felt like his biggest concern, you know, as a kid.

And we would be like, stop caring about what other people think about us.

There was, there was a real clash.

Yeah.

And this is that difference between shame cultures that I think is pointing at something real, even if it can be oversimplified, is there is a more of a concern about both like collective responsibility and just reputation in general.

Yeah.

But I wanted to get to this last part where he sort of brings this together.

He says, what then are we to make of the claim that shame in the Aurea language is lagia?

And so he says, if you mean that like, okay, lagia can be translated as this minimal definition, the deeply felt, highly motivating experience of being judged effective, then he actually thinks that's the wrong way to say it.

Because he thinks that you're not properly understanding what lagia is if you're just using that concept and saying that's the adequate translation.

Because he thinks that you have to understand the specific manifestation of the abstract claim.

And that until you understand the specific, all of those specifics that we've been talking about of what Aurya Hindus feel when they say they're feeling lagia, you haven't understood anything about shame cross-culturally.

Right.

You can't, it's like you're not giving a psychological account if all you're doing is giving the minimum definition.

That minimum definition is just conceptually what you need to go about studying.

And it's chosen in part because it's broad enough that it can apply universally or close to universally.

Yeah.

And maybe not all emotions are like that.

Maybe things like nostalgia or whatever emotion you can think of might be super culturally constructed and it doesn't make sense to talk about them universally in other cultures.

But right.

But your point is it's still empty, even though you have this definition that you think will be true of all cultures.

You haven't learned anything about cultural differences or cultural similarities until you fill in like all those seven components.

And then you are going to find something different.

Right.

That universal definition is the beginning of the process, not the end.

Like you said, it's empty until you fill it in.

And I think that we sometimes make the mistake, as somebody who studies emotion sometimes, where you think if you've gotten to the commonalities and you arrive at a definition that you've discovered something, then I think it is wrong as well.

In the context of any particular community of English language users, the word shame will imply, connote, or bring to mind its own special local set of ideas for which there may be different cultural exegesis linking it to the abstract idea of shame that is fear of being judged effective.

So I guess what he's saying is it's not a language issue.

He says, in other words, neither the English word shame nor the Uriah word lagia are names for the abstract idea of shame per se, nor do those two words mean the same things except in the minimal sense.

Alternatively stated, lagia on the east coast of India and shame on the upper west side of Manhattan are not just two different manifestations of the fear of being judged defective because each of the particular ways that such an abstract fear has taken cultural and historical shape creates a new mental state of a distinguishable kind.

That's, I think, the key claim that he's making here, that there is a new mental state that the culture determines or influences.

And like, that's not just a language issue because you see this even when it's the same language.

Yeah.

Yeah.

And that's a controversial claim.

Like that's a claim that a lot of people who study emotions would not get on board with.

But I think that it is interesting.

It's not just there's a milquetoast way of doing cultural differences.

And it's just to conclude that, oh, isn't it interesting that there is this universal?

And then maybe there's some details that you say, like, oh, they feel it more in this situation than this situation.

In this culture, they don't fear spiders.

Yeah, exactly.

And I guess as obvious from the title he's making a deep claim about what what a mental state is it's infused with all that cultural stuff that's good i didn't fully grok that as you would say um being a huge fan of the twitter ai uh but uh like i didn't fully grok that until we just got there at the end.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I think I didn't either, which is why it's good to talk about it.

Yeah.

I will end by saying like, I call my children Sin Vidwinsa, which means shameless all the time.

Yeah.

Like that's just sort of almost like a pet name that I have for them.

And I've been chastised before by English speakers who translate it as shameless.

And they say, like, why are you encouraging your kids to feel this terrible thing?

And I'm like, no, no, that's not what I'm doing.

It really is like a playful way of telling them they're being mischievous.

It's funny because it fundamentally is a call to be the kind of person who experienced the shame.

Can't get around that.

But also a fundamental respect for them like that's that's right all right uh that was good that's a good paper yeah i really like it and i feel like i understand it more all right thanks everybody oh uh one thing we're thinking of doing for the next episode we don't normally give a heads up but we actually know what we might do next time.

In honor of Paul Thomas Anderson's One Battle After Another, which I haven't seen yet, not sure when I'll get to it, hopefully soon, but in honor of this movie that's a huge phenomenon, we thought of doing Paul Thomas Anderson's other Pynchon adaptation, Inherent Vice, which will also be part of our noir summer series and it ends it right yeah that was the capstone of it so other titles have been chinatown uh double indemnity the maltese falcon touch of evil and kiss me deadly which we also released for everybody but if you do want to get all of those, you can become a Patreon supporter.

But otherwise, no matter who you are, even if you don't give us a dime, you will get to hear us dig into Inherent Vice next episode.

So watch it again, because it's great.

I'm very underrated.

All right, join us next time on Very Bad Wizards.

The great end, us has spoken.

Pay no attention to that man behind the curtain.

Join us next time on Very Bad Wizards.

I'm a very good man.

Good man.

They think deep thoughts and with no more brains than you have.

Pay no attention to that man.

Anybody can have a brain.

You're a very bad man.

I'm a very good man.

Just a very bad wizard.
